---
title: Slice components
---



Slice is a collection of several related components:

- the Slice language\
The Slice language is a computer language specifically designed for RPCs. You use Slice to specify RPCs and types used
by these RPCs. It's a simple language without any execution logic: no if, no while, no print. While you specify your
RPCs in Slice, you implement the actual business logic in a common programming language of your choice, e.g. C#. This
kind of language is called an
[Interface Definition Language](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Interface_description_language) or IDL.

- the Slice encoding\
The Slice encoding specifies how Slice language constructs such as `string`, `int32`, `float64`, `struct` and operation
parameters are encoded into streams of bytes. The Slice encoding is a simple, compact, binary encoding. Most Slice users
don't need to know the details of this encoding.

The Slice language and the Slice encoding are programming language independent: a Slice `string` has always the same
name and encoding regardless of the programming language (or languages) you use to make RPC calls and to implement the
business logic of these RPCs.

Then, for each programming language that IceRPC supports (currently C#, but soon Rust, Python and more), Slice provides:

- a Slice language mapping\
A language mapping (or binding) is a set of rules that specifies how Slice language constructs are represented in that
language. For instance, a Slice `struct` is mapped to a `struct` in C#. The C# language mapping specifies the name of
this struct, its fields, its constructors etc.

- a Slice compiler\
A language mapping is implemented by a tool--the Slice compiler--that generates code from your Slice definitions to the
mapped language. In C#, the Slice compiler for C#, `slicec-cs`, compiles Slice files into C# files. When a Slice file
defines a (Slice) struct, the corresponding C# file contains the mapped C# struct.

- Slice library code\
The code generated by the Slice compiler relies on Slice-specific library code in the target language. For example, the
code generated by the Slice compiler for C# relies on `SliceEncoder` and `SliceDecoder`, two C# structs defined in
namespace `IceRpc.Slice` that can encode resp. decode a variety of types to or from byte buffers. These structs are
included in the C# IceRpc assembly and referenced by the code generated by the Slice compiler.

All these Slice components work together to help you make RPCs without having to worry about encoding intricacies. Your
primary responsibility is to use the same Slice definitions in your client and server applications; the Slice library
code and the code generated by the Slice compiler implement the Slice encoding and take care of all the
encoding/decoding details.
