---
title: New features
description: An overview of the new features in IceRPC.
---

## New protocol with streaming support

IceRPC adds a new protocol named `icerpc` that supports streaming. Streaming allows you to send a stream of bytes or
a stream of Slice-defined types with your request or response with no or very little overhead.

This new `icerpc` protocol runs over multiplexed transports such as QUIC.

## Modular API

IceRPC offers a much more modular API than Ice.

For example, with Ice, most of the invocation logic is implemented by `Communicator`, and you can customize
`Communicator`'s behavior through configuration.

With IceRPC, the invocation logic consists of multiple objects that you compose to form an invocation pipeline: you
include only what you need in this invocation pipeline, and you can easily insert your own custom logic in this
pipeline.

## Async API

Ice's API is based on the assumption that async APIs are well-suited for RPCs but hard to use and occasionally slower;
as a result, Ice offers synchronous/blocking APIs in addition to async APIs, for ease of use and sometimes slightly
better performance.

For example, with Ice, the Slice operation `greet` is mapped to two methods on proxies generated by the Ice compiler:

- `greet`, which blocks the caller until the response is received and decoded
- `greetAsync`, which does not block the caller but returns the response through a task, future or callback
 depending on the language mapping

When you make an invocation, you can choose to call `greet` (easy to code but you block the calling thread) or
`greetAsync` (you don't block the calling thread but it's harder to obtain the response).

IceRPC takes a different, more modern approach: the async/await syntax makes async programming so easy there is no need
to provide a redundant synchronous API. The async/await syntax also makes it clear that an RPC is a call that can take a
while, throw exceptions, and should not be confused with a local call that completes very quickly.

With IceRPC:

- methods that may take a while because their implementations can wait for I/O are async (e.g. proxy methods)
- methods that never wait for I/O are synchronous (e.g. string-parsing methods)

## Optional IDL

With Ice, you can't separate Ice's IDL (the Slice language) from Ice: you always use some Slice even if you are
only sending or receiving bytes.

Conversely, IceRPC sends and receives requests and responses with byte stream payloads, and doesn't know how these byte
streams are encoded. This allows you to use IceRPC with the new Slice language, with Ice's original Slice language, or
with another IDL such as Protobuf, or with no IDL at all.

## New Slice

IceRPC comes with a brand new Slice, with a new syntax, a new serialization format, and a new file extension (`.slice`).

This new Slice is independent from IceRPC: you can naturally use it with IceRPC, but you can also use it without an RPC
framework. Other RPC frameworks may provide support for this new Slice language in the future.

The Ice compilation model for its Slice files is very much like C++: each Slice file needs to `#include` the Slice files
with the definitions it depends on. You can use a forward declaration to introduce a type without fully defining it. And
Slice files use the `.ice` file extension.

On the other hand, the compilation model for the new Slice files is more like C# and Java: the compilation uses a set of
reference files specified as argument to the compiler, and there is no `#include` preprocessing directive or forward
declarations.

Another difference is the syntax for parameters and fields: Ice's uses a C-like syntax, while the new Slice syntax is
more like Rust and Swift:

{% aside alignment="top" %}

```ice {% title="Slice definitions (old syntax)" %}
module VisitorCenter
{
    /// Represents a simple greeter.
    interface Greeter
    {
        /// Creates a personalized greeting.
        /// @param name The name of the person to greet.
        /// @return The greeting.
        string greet(string name);
    }
}
```

```slice {% title="Slice definitions (new syntax)" %}
module VisitorCenter

/// Represents a simple greeter.
interface Greeter {
    /// Creates a personalized greeting.
    /// @param name: The name of the person to greet.
    /// @returns: The greeting.
    greet(name: string) -> string
}
```

{% /aside %}
