---
title: Ice reinvented
---

IceRPC is a brand new RPC framework, that we wrote from scratch and then rewrote several times over. It is a spiritual
successor to Ice since many designs and ideas in IceRPC are a direct result of our experience developing Ice and helping
Ice users build all kind of applications with Ice.

Ice and IceRPC are both RPC frameworks with similar names, but they are quite different:

## Different scopes

Ice is a one-stop solution for building network applications. With Ice, you get a RPC framework and much more.

Ice provides a suite of components to help you build portable, multi-language networked applications, including:
- RPC
- configuration (Ice properties)
- logging (Ice logger)
- metrics/telemetry (Ice metrics)
- server deployment and monitoring (IceGrid)
- pub/sub (IceStorm, DataStorm)

On the other hand, IceRPC has a very narrow focus: RPCs (the name gave it away!). When building an application with
IceRPC, you use IceRPC for your RPCs, and you need to find other solutions for configuration, logging, server
deployment, pub/sub etc.

## Different philosophies

Ice delivers a uniform set of components, features, APIs across platforms and languages. The same APIs are available in
pretty much all programming languages and look the same. This uniformity is by design and enforced by the use of "local"
Slice definitions. This way, when you port your code from one programming language to another, the Ice portion of your
code can essentially remain the same.

A downside of this uniformity is the Ice API and APIs generated by the Slice compiler often don't follow standard naming
conventions and patterns in the target programming language, and can look odd. For example, you create an Ice object
adapter by calling `createObjetAdapter` on your communicator in all languages, even if methods are usually in
Pascal-case (`CreateObjectAdapter`) or snake-case (`create_object_adapter`) in this particular language.

On the other hand, IceRPC aims to look completely native in each programming language, by following the normal
conventions and patterns for the language. For IceRPC, language "native-ness" is more important than consistency between
IceRPC implementations in different languages.

## Different licenses

Ice and IceRPC are both fully open source but use different open source licenses.

For Ice, we selected GPLv2, a widely used and well understood reciprocal license. It's a good fit for for projects
licensed under GPLv2, for evaluation, and for some internal use. For most other use-cases, you need to purchase a
commercial license in order to use Ice in your application.

For IceRPC, we selected the Apache License version 2.0, a well-known permissive open source license. This license allows
you to use IceRPC for any application, open source or closed source, free of charge.
