---
title: High-level comparison
description: Understand why IceRPC is not a new version of Ice.
---

## Different scopes

Ice is a one-stop solution for building distributed applications. You get RPCs and much more from Ice. Ice provides a
variety of components to help you build portable, multi-language distributed applications, including:
- configuration (Ice properties)
- logging (Ice logger)
- metrics/telemetry (Ice metrics)
- executor (Ice thread pools)
- server deployment and monitoring (IceGrid)
- pub/sub (IceStorm, DataStorm)

On the other hand, IceRPC has a very narrow focus: RPCs (the name gave it away!). When building an application with
IceRPC, you use IceRPC for your RPCs, and you need to find other solutions for configuration, logging, server
deployment, pub/sub etc.

## Different philosophies

Ice delivers a uniform set of components, features, APIs across platforms and languages. The same APIs are available in
pretty much all programming languages and look the same. This uniformity is by design and enforced by the use of "local"
Slice definitions in the Ice library. This way, when you port your code from one programming language to another
language, the Ice portion of your code can essentially remain the same.

A downside of this uniformity is the Ice API and APIs generated by the Slice compiler often don't follow standard naming
conventions and patterns in the target programming language, and therefore look odd. For example, you create an Ice
object adapter by calling `createObjetAdapter` on your communicator in all languages, even if methods are usually in
Pascal-case (`CreateObjectAdapter`) or snake-case (`create_object_adapter`) in your programming language.

On the other hand, IceRPC aims to look completely native in each programming language, by following the normal
conventions and patterns for the language. For IceRPC, language "native-ness" is more important than consistency between
IceRPC implementations in different languages.

## Different licenses

Ice and IceRPC are both fully open-source but use different open-source licenses.

For Ice, we selected GPLv2, a widely used and well understood reciprocal license. It's a good fit for for open-source
projects licensed under GPLv2, for evaluation, and for some internal use. For most other use-cases, you need to purchase
a commercial license in order to use Ice in your applications.
This [dual-licensing](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Multi-licensing) model is a fair model that helped fund Ice's
development; however, GPL has become an uncommon license for software frameworks.

For IceRPC, we selected the Apache License version 2.0, a well-known permissive open-source license. This license allows
you to use IceRPC for any application, open-source or closed-source, free of charge.
