---
title: Ice::Object and checked cast
description: Understand how to call and implement checked cast
---

## The Ice::Object interface

With the Ice framework, all Ice interfaces implicitly derive from the `Ice::Object` interface, which provides four
operations: `ice_id`, `ice_ids`, `ice_ping` and `ice_isA`.

The generated code implements these operations automatically. As an application developer using the Ice framework, you
typically don't think about these built-in operations.

With IceRPC, the C# interfaces generated by the Ice compiler do not derive from any common base interface, and
`Ice::Object` is just a regular Ice interface:

```ice
module Ice
{
    /// A sequence of strings representing Ice type IDs.
    sequence<string> TypeIdSeq;

    /// Base interface with common operations.
    ["cs:identifier:IceObject"]
    interface \Object
    {
        /// Gets the Ice type IDs of all the interfaces implemented by the target service.
        /// @return The Ice type IDs of all these interfaces, sorted alphabetically.
        idempotent TypeIdSeq ice_ids();

        /// Tests whether the target service implements the specified interface.
        /// @param id The Ice type ID of the interface to test against.
        /// @return True when the target service implements this interface; otherwise, false.
        idempotent bool ice_isA(string id);

        /// Pings the service.
        idempotent void ice_ping();
    }
}
```

IceRPC does not provide the fourth operation, `ice_id`. A service can implement multiple Ice interfaces and does not
always have a single most-derived Ice interface / type ID.

When you implement an Ice service with IceRPC, you decide if you want to implement this interface.

In C#, you implement `Ice::Object` like any other interface, except you don't need to actually implement any of the
mapped interface methods. The IceRPC + Ice integration provides a default implementation for all these methods.
For example:

```csharp
using IceRpc;
using IceRpc.Features;
using IceRpc.Ice; // for IIceObjectService

[Service]
internal partial class HelloService : IHelloService, IIceObjectService
{
    // IIceObjectService provides default implementations for all the ice_ operations.

    public ValueTask SayHelloAsync(IFeatureCollection features, CancellationToken cancellationToken)
    {
        ...
    }
}
```

## Checked cast

`checkedCast` is a helper method that calls the `ice_isA` operation on the proxy being "checked cast": it asks the
target service (Ice object with Ice's terminology) if it implements a specific Ice interface. While this check is
generally unnecessary (`uncheckedCast` works just as well), it used to be shown by all Ice demos and is therefore very
common in existing code.

The net result is: if you reimplement an existing Ice server with IceRPC, your services need to implement `Ice::Object`
when they are being "checked cast" by existing Ice client applications.

On the client-side, if you like `checkedCast` and want to keep check-casting your proxies, the IceRPC + Ice integration
provides an equivalent API: [AsAsync]. The target service must implement `Ice::Object`; otherwise, `AsAsync` will fail
with a [DispatchException] with status code [NotImplemented].

## Unchecked cast

You can convert a proxy into any other proxy type with the [ToProxy] extension method. For example:

```csharp {% title="IceRPC application" %}
IceObjectProxy objectProxy = // ... a plain Ice::Object proxy

// Convert objectProxy into a WidgetProxy
WidgetProxy widgetProxy = objectProxy.ToProxy<WidgetProxy>();
```

[AsAsync]: csharp:IceRpc.Ice.ProxyExtensions.AsAsync
[DispatchException]: csharp:IceRpc.DispatchException
[NotImplemented]: csharp:IceRpc.StatusCode#NotImplemented
[ToProxy]: csharp:IceRpc.Ice.ProxyExtensions.ToProxy
