---
title: Enum types
description: Learn how to define enumerations in Slice.
---

## Enumeration type

An enumeration type or enum type is a user-defined type that can take two forms:

### Enum with underlying type

An enum with an underlying type holds a set of named constants called enumerators, and is similar to C++ and C# enums.

The underlying type can be any integral type: both [fixed size][fixed-size] and [variable size][variable-size] integral
types are accepted. The following example shows how to define an enumeration named `Fruit` with three enumerators:
`Apple`, `Pear`, and `Orange`. Its underlying type is `uint8`:

```slice
enum Fruit : uint8 { Apple, Pear, Orange }
```

### Enum with fields

An enum with no underlying type is called an "enum with fields" because each of its enumerators may define fields. An
enum with fields is a discriminated union, just like enums in Rust and Swift.

For example:

```slice
enum Shape { // no underlying type
    Circle(radius: uint32)
    Rectangle(width: uint32, length: uint32)
    Dot // an enumerator without any fields
}
```

## Enumerators - with underlying type

The enumerators of an enum with an underlying type are integral constants. The default behavior of the Slice compiler is
to assign values to these enumerators automatically. The first enumerator is assigned a value of `0`, and subsequent
enumerators are assigned increasing values. The range of these enumerator values is the range of the underlying type.

The following code example illustrates how you can explicitly assign values for the enumerators in your enumeration
type. In this example, the `Apple` enumerator is assigned a value of `1`, the `Pear` enumerator is assigned a value
of `5`, and the `Orange` enumerator gets automatically a value of `6` (the value of the preceding enumerator plus 1).

```slice
enum Fruit : uint8 {
    Apple = 1
    Pear = 5
    Orange
}
```

## Enumerators - with fields

The enumerators of an enum with fields are not constants; you can think of them as instances of nested structs.

And just like the fields of a struct, you can include tagged fields unless the enclosing enum is marked `compact`.
For example:

```slice
// Fields can be tagged unless the enum if marked compact
enum FlagColor {
    Red(tag(1) code: uint16?)
    White
    Blue(shade: string, tag(1) code: uint16?)
}

// A compact enum does not accept tagged fields
compact enum LaunchResult {
    Success(speed: float32)
    Failure(message: string, errorCode: int32)
}
```

You can also assign a numeric value to each enumerator. These numeric values are called discriminants and are used to
encode and decode the enumeration.

For example:

```slice
enum Shape {
    Circle(radius: uint32)                       // discriminant is 0
    Rectangle(width: uint32, length: uint32) = 3 // discriminant is 3
    Dot                                          // discriminant is 4
}
```

The range of these discriminants is 0 to 2,147,483,647 (int32 max).

## Unchecked enumeration

By default, when the code generated by the Slice compiler decodes an instance of an enumeration, it makes sure this
instance corresponds to a known enumerator. This is the "checked" behavior: the decoding fails for a value with no
matching enumerator.

You can also get the opposite behavior—unchecked—by prepending `unchecked` to your enumeration definition. For example:

```slice
unchecked enum ErrorCode : varuint62 {
    NotFound
    NotAuthorized
}
```

Since `ErrorCode` is marked unchecked, the generated code will successfully decode an integral value without a matching
enumerator.

A checked enumeration must have at least one enumerator, while an unchecked enumeration may have no enumerator at all.
For example, the following enumeration is valid:

```slice
// Same range as int16
unchecked enum MyInt16 : int16 {}
```

### Unchecked enum with fields

When Slice decodes an enum with fields and receives an unknown enumerator, it returns a special enumerator that holds
the undecodable bytes received from the peer.

{% callout %}
An unchecked enum cannot be marked `compact`. As a result, you can always use tagged fields in the enumerators of an
unchecked enum with fields.
{% /callout %}

## C# mapping

### Enum with underlying type in C\#

An enum with underlying type maps to a C# enumeration with the same name, and each Slice enumerator maps to a
C# enumerator with the same name. For example:

{% aside alignment="top" %}

```slice
enum Fruit : uint8 { Apple, Pear, Orange }
```

```csharp
internal enum Fruit : byte
{
    Apple = 0,
    Pear = 1,
    Orange = 2
}
```

{% /aside %}

The underlying type of the mapped enumeration is always the mapped type for the Slice underlying type. For example,
a Slice `uint8` corresponds to a C# `byte`.

### Enum with fields in C\#

C# does not provide a native discriminated union type. This mapping relies on an emulation based on record classes
[proposed a few years ago]. Briefly, a Slice enum with fields maps to a C# partial record class with the same name, and
each enumerator maps to a public nested record class with the same name as the enumerator. This nested record class
derives from the enclosing "enum type" record class.

The Slice code generator adds the attribute `[Dunet.Union]` to the base record class, which instructs the [Dunet] source
generator to generate additional helper code for these partial records.

For example:

```slice
enum Shape {
    Circle(radius: uint32)
    Rectangle(width: uint32, length: uint32)
    Dot
}
```

maps to:

```csharp
[Dunet.Union]
internal abstract partial record class Shape
{
    public partial record Circle(uint Radius) : Shape;

    public partial record Rectangle(uint Width, uint Length) : Shape;

    public partial record Dot : Shape;
}
```

{% callout %}
[ZeroC.Slice] has a dependency on the [Dunet package]; as a result, you don't need an explicit reference to Dunet in
your project.
{% /callout %}

### Extension methods

The Slice compiler generates extension methods to encode and decode instances of each enum:

- Encode*Name* to encode an enum instance
- Decode*Name* to decode an enum instance

With our `Fruit` example, we get:

```csharp
internal static class FruitSliceEncoderExtensions
{
    internal static void EncodeFruit(this ref SliceEncoder encoder, Fruit value) => ...
}

internal static class FruitSliceDecoderExtensions
{
    internal static Fruit DecodeFruit(this ref SliceDecoder decoder) => ...
}
```

For enums with an underlying type, the Slice compiler also generates an extension method As*Name* to convert a value
of the underlying type into an enumerator.

With our Fruit example:

```csharp
internal static class FruitByteExtensions
{
    internal static Fruit AsFruit(this byte value) => ...
}
```

This conversion fails and throws [InvalidDataException] when the value does not correspond to any enumerator of the
(checked) enum.

### C# mapping for unchecked enum

The mapped C# API for checked and unchecked enums is the same, with one exception: the mapping for an unchecked enum
with fields has an additional nested record class named `Unknown` that holds unknown enumerator values. For example:

```slice
unchecked enum Shape {
    Circle(radius: uint32)
    Dot
}
```

maps to:


```csharp
[Dunet.Union]
internal partial abstract record class Shape
{
    public partial record Circle(uint Radius) : Shape;

    public partial record Dot : Shape;

    // Extra "enumerator" when mapping an unchecked enum with fields
    public partial record Unknown(int Discriminant, ReadOnlyMemory<byte> Fields) : Shape;
}
```

This `Unknown` enumerator can be re-encoded later without losing any information.

### cs::attribute attribute

The `cs::attribute` [attribute](attributes) adds the specified C# attribute to the mapped C# enum. You typically use it
to add the [FlagsAttribute] to the mapped C# enum. For example:
{% aside alignment="top" %}

```slice
[cs::attribute("Flags")]
enum MultiHue : uint8 {
    None = 0,
    Black = 1,
    Red = 2,
    Green = 4,
    Blue = 8
}
```

```csharp
[Flags]
internal enum MultiHue : byte
{
    None = 0,
    Black = 1,
    Red = 2,
    Green = 4,
    Blue = 8,
}
```

{% /aside %}
You can also apply `cs::attribute` to an enumerator to get the specified C# attribute on the mapped C# enumerator.

[Dunet]: https://github.com/domn1995/dunet
[Dunet package]: https://www.nuget.org/packages/Dunet
[fixed-size]: primitive-types#fixed-size-integral-types
[proposed a few years ago]: https://github.com/dotnet/csharplang/issues/8928
[variable-size]: primitive-types#variable-size-integral-types
[InvalidDataException]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.io.invaliddataexception
[FlagsAttribute]: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.flagsattribute
[ZeroC.Slice]: https://www.nuget.org/packages/ZeroC.Slice
